Readme.md, before:

# Trading Engine

## Improvement Requirements
- Add FilledAmount field to OrderStatusMsg
- When market order is filled send OrderStatusMsg with OrderStatus_Filled instead of OrderStatus_Cancelled
- Send OrderStatusMsg with OrderStatus_Filled for all filled orders. (Now, filled limit orders do not generate such events)

## To Do

- !!! When the engine restarts it should fetch the last trade generate for each connected market
  and only start generating trades from that last trade based on the max(order ids).
- !!!Replace the current price point with a more performant data structure, like: https://github.com/gammazero/deque or https://github.com/edwingeng/deque
- Revisit skip lists and try to optimize their usage by reusing the same iterator: https://github.com/ryszard/goskiplist
- Add support for multiple communication channels: Apache Kafka(done), RabbitMQ, Redis, Apache Pulsar, AWS SQS, ZeroMQ
- Possibly replace protobuf with https://capnproto.org/ ??
- Add support for fix protocol... check http://cyan.ly/blog/gotrade-fix-trading-system-golang-2016 and https://github.com/cyanly/gotrade/blob/master/proto/order/order.proto

### Stop implementation

Any order that is received by the engine can have a __stop flag__ set along with a __stop price__.
These flags control when the order will be added in the orderbook with the type set at creation: Market or Limit.

The `StopPrice` is __required__ for any Stop order.

There are three types of Stop orders:
- __None__: which means that the order is not a stop order and the it should be processed imediatelly
- __Loss__: which means that the order triggers when the last trade price changes to a value at or below the `StopPrice`
- __Entry__: which means that the order triggers when the last trade price changes to a value at or above the `StopPrice`

Stop orders will only be activated by the next trade.
When it's added no checks will be done based on the previous last trade price.

The processing flow for stop orders is as follows:
1. When an order that has the stop flag and price set the order is added to an ordered list based on the flag.
2. When a new batch of trades is generated the system will check if the last price can activate any stop order.
3. If it can then the found orders are removed from the pending list.
4. Every stop order activated is added in the system as limit/market order in the correct side of the market.
5. For every activated order an event with order activated is generated by the engine.
6. The order is then processed normally by the engine and can generate trades.

### Questions/Improvements

- **Q: How do we handle server crashes and maintain the trading lists?**
  A: The engine now uses consumer instead of consumer groups and can automatically restart from any previous offset
- **Q: How/When do we acknowledge orders?**
  A: Each order received generated a status update event with "untouched" for initial confirmation and then the list of trades.
     Stop orders generate a "pending" status update and a order activated event when the condition was met.
- **Q: How do we handle persistance while maintaining the high load?**
  A:
- **Q: How do we handle upgrades and redeployments?**
  A:
- **Q: How do we prevent double spending?**
  A:
- **Q: How do we prevent memory leaks?**
  A:
- **Q: Perform benchmarks on the entire system and check what happens when the load is increased.**
  A:

## Development Notes

__Generate protobuf classes__

```bash
# download protoc C++ binaries for mac from https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases
# install protoc for golang
go get github.com/golang/protobuf/protoc-gen-go

# regenerate the golang classes based on the proto model
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/market.proto
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/order.proto
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/trade.proto
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/event.proto
```

__Testing__

```bash
# local benchmarks using data loaded from a file
go test -bench=^BenchmarkWithRandomData -run=^$ -timeout 10s -benchmem -cpu 8 -cpuprofile cpu.prof -memprofile mem.prof -gcflags="-m" ./benchmarks --gen
go-torch benchmarks.test cpu.prof
# local benckmarks using data from Apache Kafka
go test -bench=^BenchmarkKafkaConsumer -run=^$ -timeout 10s -benchmem -cpu 8 -cpuprofile cpu.prof -memprofile mem.prof -gcflags="-m" ./benchmarks --gen
# if the sample data was already generated remove the --gen flag from the commands above
```

__Create flame chart out of active server__

```
go-torch -u http://127.0.0.1:6060
```

__Start GoConvey__

```
govendor install
goconvey .
```

## How to build a trading engine

In this section I will try to document step by step how to build a trading engine in Golang from scratch.

### Orders

Every trading engine needs to listen for orders from some sort of external system. This can be a web socket, a queue system, a database, etc.
The point is that we need a way to encapsulate each type of order received.

The trading engine will therefore keep a list of trade orders and match incomming orders against that list based on the type of order that is received.

For example if there is an unprocessed buy order of 200 for 0.41 and an incomming order of sell for 100 for 0.40 then the incomming order is satisfied on the spot, the buy order is decreased by 100 and a buy signal is triggerred.

Such an order may look like the following data structure:

```js
{
  action: 0, // 0=sell, 1=buy, 2=cancel-sell, 3=cancel-buy
  category: 0, // 0=market, 1=limit, 2=stop-loss, 3=... // see https://www.investopedia.com/university/intro-to-order-types/ for other possible types
  price: 100,
  amount: 124,
  id: 51987123,
}
```

### Engine

The engine will maintain two lists of orders. Buy orders and Sell orders.
It should then listen for new orders and try to satisfy them against these lists.

The engine should support the following actions:

- Done: Fill a new buy/sell order or add it to the list if it can't be filled yet
- Cancel an existing order and remove it from the lists
- Listen for new incomming commands/orders
- Send every trade made to an external system
- Handle over 1.000.000 trades/second
- Done: 100% test converage
- Fully tested with historical data

## Benchmarks

### Process orders rates

This bechmark checks the performance of executing orders after they are available in memory.

```
// Old benchmarks

Total Orders: 1000000
Total Trades: 996903
Orders/second: 667924.145191
Trades/second: 665855.584113
Pending Buy: 2838
Lowest Ask: 9940629
Pending Sell: 2838
Highest Bid: 7007361
Duration (seconds): 1.497176

1000000	      1497 ns/op	     642 B/op	       6 allocs/op

// New Benchmarks without decoding/encoding orders/trades
Total Orders: 100
Orders/second: 980392.156863
Pending Buy: 18
Lowest Ask: 999705600000000
Pending Sell: 10
Highest Bid: 999622700000000
Duration (seconds): 0.000102

Total Orders: 10000
Orders/second: 1511944.360448
Pending Buy: 591
Lowest Ask: 996920900000000
Pending Sell: 662
Highest Bid: 996859500000000
Duration (seconds): 0.006614

Total Orders: 1000000
Orders/second: 1160515.547427
Pending Buy: 2244
Lowest Ask: 996670000000000
Pending Sell: 1038
Highest Bid: 700948400000000
Duration (seconds): 0.861686

Total Orders: 2000000
Orders/second: 1058599.293173
Pending Buy: 4207
Lowest Ask: 994008100000000
Pending Sell: 1350
Highest Bid: 402202500000000
Duration (seconds): 1.889289

 2000000	       944 ns/op	     505 B/op	       3 allocs/op

// New Benchmarks with decoding/encoding orders/trades

Total Orders: 100
Orders/second: 735294.117647
Pending Buy: 18
Lowest Ask: 999705600000000
Pending Sell: 10
Highest Bid: 999622700000000
Duration (seconds): 0.000136

Total Orders: 10000
Orders/second: 831393.415364
Pending Buy: 591
Lowest Ask: 996920900000000
Pending Sell: 662
Highest Bid: 996859500000000
Duration (seconds): 0.012028

Total Orders: 1000000
Orders/second: 600300.990917
Pending Buy: 2244
Lowest Ask: 996670000000000
Pending Sell: 1038
Highest Bid: 700948400000000
Duration (seconds): 1.665831

 1000000	      1665 ns/op	     698 B/op	       7 allocs/op
```

### Consumer and Producer

The following benchmark refers to consuming orders from a Kafka server, processing them
by the trading engine and saving generated trades back to the Kafka server.

```
Total Orders: 300000
Total Trades Generated: 295126
Orders/second: 248929.396155
Trades Generated/second: 244885.123232
Pending Buy: 3970
Lowest Ask: 3967957
Pending Sell: 3970
Highest Bid: 3706215
Duration (seconds): 1.205161

 300000          4043 ns/op       2437 B/op       22 allocs/op
```

## Further optimizations

- Add support for FIX formats
- Optimize Kafka Producer rate
- Use the golang profiler to see where the bottlenecks are in the code
- Write to multiple partitions at once when generating trades
- Optimize allocations with buffers bytes (see minute 23 of the video): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuQcbqYK0BY

## Resources

**Architecture Design**

- https://martinfowler.com/articles/lmax.html
- https://web.archive.org/web/20110314042933/http://howtohft.wordpress.com/
- http://blog.bitfinex.com/announcements/introducing-hive/
- https://web.archive.org/web/20110310171841/http://www.quantcup.org/home/spec
- https://web.archive.org/web/20110315000556/http://drdobbs.com:80/high-performance-computing/210604448

**Trading Engine**

- - Matcher: https://github.com/fmstephe/matching_engine/blob/master/matcher/matcher.go
- Order book: https://github.com/hookercookerman/trading_engine/blob/master/trading_engine/order_book.go
- https://github.com/bloq/cpptrade#summary
- - https://www.investopedia.com/university/intro-to-order-types/
- - https://github.com/IanLKaplan/matchingEngine/wiki/Market-Order-Matching-Engines
- - https://medium.com/@Oskarr3/implementing-cqrs-using-kafka-and-sarama-library-in-golang-da7efa3b77fe
- https://hackernoon.com/a-blockchain-experiment-with-apache-kafka-97ee0ab6aefc

**Golang Docs**

- https://www.apress.com/gp/book/9781484226919
- https://go101.org/article/channel-closing.html

**Communication**

- Apache Kafka: https://godoc.org/github.com/Shopify/sarama
- Alternative Kafka Client: https://github.com/confluentinc/confluent-kafka-go
- JSON Decoder IO Reader: https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/json/#Decoder.Decode
- Unix Domain Socket: https://gist.github.com/hakobe/6f70d69b8c5243117787fd488ae7fbf2

**Performance**

- Great presentation on how to use go profilling tools: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N3PWzBeLX2M
- LMAX disruptor: https://lmax-exchange.github.io/disruptor/
  - https://dzone.com/articles/using-apache-kafka-for-real-time-event-processing
  - https://www.slideshare.net/InfoQ/low-latency-trading-architecture-at-lmax-exchange
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJ4d_PZ6Gns
  - Use a ring buffer instead of channels
  - Understand the internals of the code you call
  -
- https://blog.golang.org/profiling-go-programs
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Performance
- https://www.quora.com/How-does-one-become-a-low-latency-programmer
- https://www.akkadia.org/drepper/cpumemory.pdf
- https://engineering.linkedin.com/kafka/benchmarking-apache-kafka-2-million-writes-second-three-cheap-machines
- FS buffering: https://zensrc.wordpress.com/2016/06/15/golang-buffer-vs-non-buffer-in-io/
- Fwd: https://blog.kintoandar.com/2016/08/fwd-the-little-forwarder-that-could.html
- Effective kafka topic partitioning: https://blog.newrelic.com/2018/03/13/effective-strategies-kafka-topic-partitioning/

**Performance: To Read**

- http://bhomnick.net/building-a-simple-limit-order-in-go/
- https://github.com/ProofSuite/amp-matching-engine
- https://github.com/robaho/go-trader
- https://github.com/i25959341/orderbook
- https://github.com/crypto-bank

**Algorithms**

- http://igoro.com/archive/skip-lists-are-fascinating/
- https://www.onixs.biz/fix-dictionary.html

**Liquidity**

- https://github.com/HydroProtocol/amm-bots


### Testing References

**Benchmarking**

- https://godoc.org/github.com/codahale/hdrhistogram
- https://github.com/tylertreat/bench

**Testing**

- Mock sarama producers: https://medium.com/@Oskarr3/implementing-cqrs-using-kafka-and-sarama-library-in-golang-da7efa3b77fe

Commit message:

Add license key support
Former-commit-id: b7e23c72d46748b40d777d76ef6331932d93a7a6

Readme.md, after:

# Trading Engine

## License Todos
- Generate a license lock file and increment the number of uses if the file is missing
- Generate license metrics to a server I control to see exact number of metrics and check for compromised keys
- Update the changelog and include it in the distributed package
- Create a Readme file template with information on how to get started
## To Do

- !!! When the engine restarts it should fetch the last trade generate for each connected market
  and only start generating trades from that last trade based on the max(order ids).
- !!!Replace the current price point with a more performant data structure, like: https://github.com/gammazero/deque or https://github.com/edwingeng/deque
- Revisit skip lists and try to optimize their usage by reusing the same iterator: https://github.com/ryszard/goskiplist
- Add support for multiple communication channels: Apache Kafka(done), RabbitMQ, Redis, Apache Pulsar, AWS SQS, ZeroMQ
- Possibly replace protobuf with https://capnproto.org/ ??
- Add support for fix protocol... check http://cyan.ly/blog/gotrade-fix-trading-system-golang-2016 and https://github.com/cyanly/gotrade/blob/master/proto/order/order.proto

### Stop implementation

Any order that is received by the engine can have a __stop flag__ set along with a __stop price__.
These flags control when the order will be added in the orderbook with the type set at creation: Market or Limit.

The `StopPrice` is __required__ for any Stop order.

There are three types of Stop orders:
- __None__: which means that the order is not a stop order and the it should be processed imediatelly
- __Loss__: which means that the order triggers when the last trade price changes to a value at or below the `StopPrice`
- __Entry__: which means that the order triggers when the last trade price changes to a value at or above the `StopPrice`

Stop orders will only be activated by the next trade.
When it's added no checks will be done based on the previous last trade price.

The processing flow for stop orders is as follows:
1. When an order that has the stop flag and price set the order is added to an ordered list based on the flag.
2. When a new batch of trades is generated the system will check if the last price can activate any stop order.
3. If it can then the found orders are removed from the pending list.
4. Every stop order activated is added in the system as limit/market order in the correct side of the market.
5. For every activated order an event with order activated is generated by the engine.
6. The order is then processed normally by the engine and can generate trades.

### Questions/Improvements

- **Q: How do we handle server crashes and maintain the trading lists?**
  A: The engine now uses consumer instead of consumer groups and can automatically restart from any previous offset
- **Q: How/When do we acknowledge orders?**
  A: Each order received generated a status update event with "untouched" for initial confirmation and then the list of trades.
     Stop orders generate a "pending" status update and a order activated event when the condition was met.
- **Q: How do we handle persistance while maintaining the high load?**
  A:
- **Q: How do we handle upgrades and redeployments?**
  A:
- **Q: How do we prevent double spending?**
  A:
- **Q: How do we prevent memory leaks?**
  A:
- **Q: Perform benchmarks on the entire system and check what happens when the load is increased.**
  A:

## Development Notes

__Generate protobuf classes__

```bash
# download protoc C++ binaries for mac from https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases
# install protoc for golang
go get github.com/golang/protobuf/protoc-gen-go

# regenerate the golang classes based on the proto model
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/market.proto
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/order.proto
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/trade.proto
~/tools/protoc/bin/protoc -I=./model --go_out=./model ./model/event.proto
```

__Testing__

```bash
# local benchmarks using data loaded from a file
go test -bench=^BenchmarkWithRandomData -run=^$ -timeout 10s -benchmem -cpu 8 -cpuprofile cpu.prof -memprofile mem.prof -gcflags="-m" ./benchmarks --gen
go-torch benchmarks.test cpu.prof
# local benckmarks using data from Apache Kafka
go test -bench=^BenchmarkKafkaConsumer -run=^$ -timeout 10s -benchmem -cpu 8 -cpuprofile cpu.prof -memprofile mem.prof -gcflags="-m" ./benchmarks --gen
# if the sample data was already generated remove the --gen flag from the commands above
```

__Create flame chart out of active server__

```
go-torch -u http://127.0.0.1:6060
```

__Start GoConvey__

```
govendor install
goconvey .
```

## How to build a trading engine

In this section I will try to document step by step how to build a trading engine in Golang from scratch.

### Orders

Every trading engine needs to listen for orders from some sort of external system. This can be a web socket, a queue system, a database, etc.
The point is that we need a way to encapsulate each type of order received.

The trading engine will therefore keep a list of trade orders and match incomming orders against that list based on the type of order that is received.

For example if there is an unprocessed buy order of 200 for 0.41 and an incomming order of sell for 100 for 0.40 then the incomming order is satisfied on the spot, the buy order is decreased by 100 and a buy signal is triggerred.

Such an order may look like the following data structure:

```js
{
  action: 0, // 0=sell, 1=buy, 2=cancel-sell, 3=cancel-buy
  category: 0, // 0=market, 1=limit, 2=stop-loss, 3=... // see https://www.investopedia.com/university/intro-to-order-types/ for other possible types
  price: 100,
  amount: 124,
  id: 51987123,
}
```

### Engine

The engine will maintain two lists of orders. Buy orders and Sell orders.
It should then listen for new orders and try to satisfy them against these lists.

The engine should support the following actions:

- Done: Fill a new buy/sell order or add it to the list if it can't be filled yet
- Cancel an existing order and remove it from the lists
- Listen for new incomming commands/orders
- Send every trade made to an external system
- Handle over 1.000.000 trades/second
- Done: 100% test converage
- Fully tested with historical data

## Benchmarks

### Process orders rates

This bechmark checks the performance of executing orders after they are available in memory.

```
// Old benchmarks

Total Orders: 1000000
Total Trades: 996903
Orders/second: 667924.145191
Trades/second: 665855.584113
Pending Buy: 2838
Lowest Ask: 9940629
Pending Sell: 2838
Highest Bid: 7007361
Duration (seconds): 1.497176

1000000	      1497 ns/op	     642 B/op	       6 allocs/op

// New Benchmarks without decoding/encoding orders/trades
Total Orders: 100
Orders/second: 980392.156863
Pending Buy: 18
Lowest Ask: 999705600000000
Pending Sell: 10
Highest Bid: 999622700000000
Duration (seconds): 0.000102

Total Orders: 10000
Orders/second: 1511944.360448
Pending Buy: 591
Lowest Ask: 996920900000000
Pending Sell: 662
Highest Bid: 996859500000000
Duration (seconds): 0.006614

Total Orders: 1000000
Orders/second: 1160515.547427
Pending Buy: 2244
Lowest Ask: 996670000000000
Pending Sell: 1038
Highest Bid: 700948400000000
Duration (seconds): 0.861686

Total Orders: 2000000
Orders/second: 1058599.293173
Pending Buy: 4207
Lowest Ask: 994008100000000
Pending Sell: 1350
Highest Bid: 402202500000000
Duration (seconds): 1.889289

 2000000	       944 ns/op	     505 B/op	       3 allocs/op

// New Benchmarks with decoding/encoding orders/trades

Total Orders: 100
Orders/second: 735294.117647
Pending Buy: 18
Lowest Ask: 999705600000000
Pending Sell: 10
Highest Bid: 999622700000000
Duration (seconds): 0.000136

Total Orders: 10000
Orders/second: 831393.415364
Pending Buy: 591
Lowest Ask: 996920900000000
Pending Sell: 662
Highest Bid: 996859500000000
Duration (seconds): 0.012028

Total Orders: 1000000
Orders/second: 600300.990917
Pending Buy: 2244
Lowest Ask: 996670000000000
Pending Sell: 1038
Highest Bid: 700948400000000
Duration (seconds): 1.665831

 1000000	      1665 ns/op	     698 B/op	       7 allocs/op
```

### Consumer and Producer

The following benchmark refers to consuming orders from a Kafka server, processing them
by the trading engine and saving generated trades back to the Kafka server.

```
Total Orders: 300000
Total Trades Generated: 295126
Orders/second: 248929.396155
Trades Generated/second: 244885.123232
Pending Buy: 3970
Lowest Ask: 3967957
Pending Sell: 3970
Highest Bid: 3706215
Duration (seconds): 1.205161

 300000          4043 ns/op       2437 B/op       22 allocs/op
```

## Further optimizations

- Add support for FIX formats
- Optimize Kafka Producer rate
- Use the golang profiler to see where the bottlenecks are in the code
- Write to multiple partitions at once when generating trades
- Optimize allocations with buffers bytes (see minute 23 of the video): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuQcbqYK0BY

## Resources

**Architecture Design**

- https://martinfowler.com/articles/lmax.html
- https://web.archive.org/web/20110314042933/http://howtohft.wordpress.com/
- http://blog.bitfinex.com/announcements/introducing-hive/
- https://web.archive.org/web/20110310171841/http://www.quantcup.org/home/spec
- https://web.archive.org/web/20110315000556/http://drdobbs.com:80/high-performance-computing/210604448

**Trading Engine**

- - Matcher: https://github.com/fmstephe/matching_engine/blob/master/matcher/matcher.go
- Order book: https://github.com/hookercookerman/trading_engine/blob/master/trading_engine/order_book.go
- https://github.com/bloq/cpptrade#summary
- - https://www.investopedia.com/university/intro-to-order-types/
- - https://github.com/IanLKaplan/matchingEngine/wiki/Market-Order-Matching-Engines
- - https://medium.com/@Oskarr3/implementing-cqrs-using-kafka-and-sarama-library-in-golang-da7efa3b77fe
- https://hackernoon.com/a-blockchain-experiment-with-apache-kafka-97ee0ab6aefc

**Golang Docs**

- https://www.apress.com/gp/book/9781484226919
- https://go101.org/article/channel-closing.html

**Communication**

- Apache Kafka: https://godoc.org/github.com/Shopify/sarama
- Alternative Kafka Client: https://github.com/confluentinc/confluent-kafka-go
- JSON Decoder IO Reader: https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/json/#Decoder.Decode
- Unix Domain Socket: https://gist.github.com/hakobe/6f70d69b8c5243117787fd488ae7fbf2

**Performance**

- Great presentation on how to use go profilling tools: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N3PWzBeLX2M
- LMAX disruptor: https://lmax-exchange.github.io/disruptor/
  - https://dzone.com/articles/using-apache-kafka-for-real-time-event-processing
  - https://www.slideshare.net/InfoQ/low-latency-trading-architecture-at-lmax-exchange
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJ4d_PZ6Gns
  - Use a ring buffer instead of channels
  - Understand the internals of the code you call
  -
- https://blog.golang.org/profiling-go-programs
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Performance
- https://www.quora.com/How-does-one-become-a-low-latency-programmer
- https://www.akkadia.org/drepper/cpumemory.pdf
- https://engineering.linkedin.com/kafka/benchmarking-apache-kafka-2-million-writes-second-three-cheap-machines
- FS buffering: https://zensrc.wordpress.com/2016/06/15/golang-buffer-vs-non-buffer-in-io/
- Fwd: https://blog.kintoandar.com/2016/08/fwd-the-little-forwarder-that-could.html
- Effective kafka topic partitioning: https://blog.newrelic.com/2018/03/13/effective-strategies-kafka-topic-partitioning/

**Performance: To Read**

- http://bhomnick.net/building-a-simple-limit-order-in-go/
- https://github.com/ProofSuite/amp-matching-engine
- https://github.com/robaho/go-trader
- https://github.com/i25959341/orderbook
- https://github.com/crypto-bank

**Algorithms**

- http://igoro.com/archive/skip-lists-are-fascinating/
- https://www.onixs.biz/fix-dictionary.html

**Liquidity**

- https://github.com/HydroProtocol/amm-bots


### Testing References

**Benchmarking**

- https://godoc.org/github.com/codahale/hdrhistogram
- https://github.com/tylertreat/bench

**Testing**

- Mock sarama producers: https://medium.com/@Oskarr3/implementing-cqrs-using-kafka-and-sarama-library-in-golang-da7efa3b77fe
